PMM-10578 Proposal to move from dbaas-controller to dbaas-operator and OLM for DBaaS (#1365)
percona/pmm: docs/proposals/dbaas/01-architecture/proposal.md

1. Non-native Kubernetes API to work with clusters. DBaaS controller has only gRPC API and this creates additional friction for community users to work/extend with the controller. One needs to generate a gRPC client to communicate with the DBaaS controller. Thus implementing the integration testing framework becomes a complex task to solve because popular frameworks such as codecept.js or playwright do not have gRPC support.
2. DBaaS controller has a set of CRUD endpoints for each database type (e.g. PXC and PSMDB). It adds additional room for bugs/inconsistencies and has the following issues
    * There’s no simplified and generic API for any database cluster
    * PMM needs to make two requests to get a list of created clusters (one for PSMDB and one for PXC clusters). In case of adding new database support, the DBaaS controller should have an additional set of CRUD endpoints and PMM should also call the list method for the new database type.

3. DBaaS controller has a lack of test coverage and integration testing because of the reasons above. Yet we can create an integration testing framework and increase coverage but in that case, it’ll cost a lot of time.

> 4. Currently, the DBaaS controller has only basic features such as CRUD operators for the database cluster and a lack of backup/restore features/additional configuration. There’s no way to specify additional parameters (Database configuration options, load balancer rules, storage class, backup schedule)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Currently, DBaaS controller has only basic features such as CRUD operators for the database cluster and a lack of backup/restore features and additional configuration. There’s no way to specify additional parameters (Database configuration options, load balancer rules, storage class, backup schedule)
```

5. REST API for PMM does not follow REST guidelines.

Moving to OLM and a DBaaS operator will improve this situation.

## Goals

> 1. Make DBaaS more Kubernetes native and so make it the first-class citizen in the Kubernetes ecosystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Make DBaaS more Kubernetes native will make it a first-class citizen in the Kubernetes ecosystem.
```

> 2. Improve the overall quality of DBaaS by adding an integration testing framework

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Improve the overall quality of DBaaS by adding an integration testing framework.
```

> 3. Improve performance of PMM/DBaaS feature by using native ways of communication with Kubernetes. PMM will directly call k8s API endpoints and use client-go caches for large-scale deployments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Improve performance of PMM DBaaS via the native communication with Kubernetes. PMM will directly call k8s API endpoints and use client-go caches for large-scale deployments.
```

> 4. Reduce the complexity of installing/managing operators in terms of updating/upgrading operators when there’s a new release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Reduce the complexity of installing/managing operators in terms of upgrading operators to a newer version.
```

5. Provide generic specifications to create/edit/delete a database cluster.
6. Provide generic specifications to backup/restore a database cluster inside Kubernetes.
7. Provide REST API that follows guidelines and provides a better developer experience for the automation and integration with PMM/DBaaS.

> 8. Provide a simplified way to create templates for a database cluster creation with pre-filled defaults.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. Provide a simplified way to create templates for a database cluster creation with sane defaults.
```

## Non-goals

> 1. Bloat size of PMM docker container

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Bloat the size of PMM docker container
```

2. Overcomplicate architecture
3. Overcomplicate the overall development process

## Proposal

> The main idea is to move from the dbaas-controller that manages operators’ installation/updating its version database creation/management inside Kubernetes to a dbaas-operator and [OLM](https://olm.operatorframework.io/). The high-level architecture is described below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main idea is to move from dbaas-controller that manages the operators’ installation, updates its version database creation, provides management inside Kubernetes to dbaas-operator and [OLM](https://olm.operatorframework.io/). The high-level architecture is described below.
```

![Proposed architecture](./proposed_arch_full.jpg)

> In that case, the dbaas-operator provides Kubernetes native implementation of the creating/managing database clusters and acts like `unified operator to create any database cluster`. OLM installs and updates a version of the operators (psmdb, pxc, dbaas, victoria metrics).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In that case, dbaas-operator provides a Kubernetes native implementation for creating/managing database clusters and acts like `unified operator to create any database cluster`. OLM installs and updates a version of the operators (psmdb, pxc, dbaas, victoria metrics).
```

Example for PXC operator (It's only 1.10 available on operatorhub, however it demonstrates the idea)

```bash
kubectl get csv -n my-percona-xtradb-cluster-operator
NAME                                      DISPLAY                                   VERSION   REPLACES                                 PHASE
percona-xtradb-cluster-operator.v1.10.0   Percona Distribution for MySQL Operator   1.10.0    percona-xtradb-cluster-operator.v1.9.0   Installing
```

> In that case, PMM/DBaaS will have a consistent way to get operator version. In addition, OLM can manage a complex upgrades for operatos via [InstallPlan](https://olm.operatorframework.io/docs/concepts/crds/installplan/), [OperatorGroup](https://olm.operatorframework.io/docs/concepts/crds/operatorgroup/) or [UpgradeGraph](https://olm.operatorframework.io/docs/glossary/#update-graph).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In that case, PMM DBaaS will provide a consistent way to get operator version. In addition, OLM can manage a complex upgrades for operators via [InstallPlan](https://olm.operatorframework.io/docs/concepts/crds/installplan/), [OperatorGroup](https://olm.operatorframework.io/docs/concepts/crds/operatorgroup/) or [UpgradeGraph](https://olm.operatorframework.io/docs/glossary/#update-graph).
```

A high-level architecture diagram of OLM
![OLM Architecture](./olm_arch.jpg)

> High-level sequence diagram that illustraces an Installation and upgrading process inside PMM/DBaaS in terms of end user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
High-level sequence diagram that illustrates the installation and upgrade process inside PMM DBaaS from the end user perspective
```

    OLM->>ManageD: Sure. I downloaded it for you and waiting for your approval to switch to a new version
    ManageD->>PMM UI: Yeah, there's a new version of operator available
    Note left of PMM UI: A user approved the upgrade request
    PMM UI->> ManageD: approve a new version of operator
    ManageD->>OLM: approve an subscription upgrade request
    Note left of OLM: A new version of operator is available 
```    
This process makes version service usage for supported versions of operators obsolete because it gets the latest version of available operator from the catalog. However, the catalog can be managed by our team and we'll push only supported versions of operators to the catalog. This also will improve integration testing for unreleased versions of operators.

### Working with the databases

The second part of the proposal is implementing the generic and simplified API to create database clusters via k8s operator. The proposal discusses the drawbacks of the current implementation in the Motivation section and moving to the dbaas-operator will have the following benefits 

1. Kubernetes native way to work with database clusters via unified and general specifications.

> 2. PMM/DBaaS does need to care about the state of a managed database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. PMM DBaaS does need to care about the state of a managed database.
```

> 3. PMM/DBaaS should manage clusters that were created via PMM/DBaaS.Yet,  it manages clusters that were created via Percona operators now. Dbaas-operator can use its own kubernetes annotations to specify database clusters managed by PMM/DBaaS. Also, it opens room for additional features such as CR templates to create a database cluster and update a version of a template using the same annotations spec.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. PMM DBaaS should manage clusters that were created via PMM DBaaS. Yet, it manages clusters that were created via Percona operators now. DBaaS operator can use its own kubernetes annotations to specify database clusters managed by PMM DBaaS. Also, it opens room for additional features such as CR templates to create a database cluster and update a version of a template using the same annotations spec.
```

> 4. Installation and upgrading of dbaas-operator will be managed by OLM as proposed above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Installation and upgrade of dbaas-operator will be managed by OLM as proposed above.
```

> 5. Dbaas-operator opens a possibility to create an easy to use integration testing framework using codecept.js/playwright or even simple bash scripts. Integration testing can be covered by development team. It can use Github actions as a pipeline to run additional tests to check create/load/run queries agains exposed/non-exposed database clusters. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Dbaas-operator opens a possibility to create an easy-to-use integration testing framework using codecept.js/playwright or even a simple bash scripts. Integration testing can be covered by the development team. It can use Github actions as a pipeline to run additional tests to check create/load/run queries agains exposed/non-exposed database clusters. 
```

# Kubernetes-native implementation for PMM/DBaaS

## Summary

PMM DBaaS has a lot of functionality to install/manage operators and CRUD operations for either a Percona XtraDB or a Percona Server For MongoDB cluster. However, the current implementation is not extensible enough and lacks scalability features.

This proposal introduces architectural changes that are required to make DBaaS more extensible and more native for K8S.

## Motivation

The current architecture for DBaaS has the following components:

1. PMM that exposes REST API for UI and some automation
2. DBaaS controller that exposes gRPC API to PMM and works with Kubernetes clusters

![Current DBaaS architecture](./current_arch.jpg)

As a proof of concept, this architecture covers everything. However, it has the following issues:

> 1. Non-native Kubernetes API to work with clusters. DBaaS controller has only gRPC API and this creates additional friction for community users to work/extend with the controller. One needs to generate a gRPC client to communicate with the DBaaS controller. Thus implementing the integration testing framework becomes a complex task to solve because test frameworks such as playwright or codecept.js do not have gRPC support.

Author: TODO:
1. Describe the advantages of integration with kubectl for the end user
2. Remove mention of codecept.js and playwright. They are obsolete and mention kuttl as a solution for integration testing

Also it would be best to have clear motivation described from the user and developer perspective

> 1. Non-native Kubernetes API to work with clusters. DBaaS controller has only gRPC API and this creates additional friction for community users to work/extend with the controller. One needs to generate a gRPC client to communicate with the DBaaS controller. Thus implementing the integration testing framework becomes a complex task to solve because test frameworks such as playwright or codecept.js do not have gRPC support.

Author: Add context for portability and move to another project

2. DBaaS controller has a set of CRUD endpoints for each database type (e.g. PXC and PSMDB). It adds additional room for bugs/inconsistencies and has the following issues:
    * There’s no simple and generic API for any database cluster
    * PMM needs to make two requests to get a list of created clusters (one for PSMDB and one for PXC clusters). In case we need to add support for another database, DBaaS controller would have an additional set of CRUD endpoints and PMM whould also call the list method for the new database type.

3. DBaaS controller suffers from insufficient test coverage and integration testing because of the reasons mentioned above. Yet we can create an integration testing framework and increase coverage, but in that case it’ll require a substantial effort.

> 4. Currently, DBaaS controller has only basic features such as CRUD operators for the database cluster and a lack of backup/restore features and additional configuration. There’s no way to specify additional parameters (Database configuration options, load balancer rules, storage class, backup schedule)

Author: It's a limitation of current dbaas architecture

> 4. Currently, DBaaS controller has only basic features such as CRUD operators for the database cluster and a lack of backup/restore features and additional configuration. There’s no way to specify additional parameters (Database configuration options, load balancer rules, storage class, backup schedule)

Author: Describe that it's extra work to implement a feature and not a limitation

> 4. Currently, DBaaS controller has only basic features such as CRUD operators for the database cluster and a lack of backup/restore features and additional configuration. There’s no way to specify additional parameters (Database configuration options, load balancer rules, storage class, backup schedule)

Author: I described it below

5. REST API for PMM does not follow REST guidelines.

Moving to OLM and a DBaaS operator will improve this situation.

> ## Goals

Reviewer 2: as I remember the current DBaaS implementation is limited to using the `default` namespace only in K8S. But there is nothing about using different namespaces in the list of goals

1. Make DBaaS more Kubernetes native will make it a first-class citizen in the Kubernetes ecosystem. End users can use kubectl to work with PMM/DBaaS to edit/manage database clusters.
2. Improve performance of PMM DBaaS via the native communication with Kubernetes. PMM will directly call k8s API endpoints and use client-go caches for large-scale deployments.
3. Reduce the complexity of managing operator's installation/management. OLM will implement lifecycle management for operators and we can drop code that does the same for PMM.
4. Provide generic specifications to create/edit/delete a database cluster.
5. Provide generic specifications to backup/restore a database cluster inside Kubernetes.

> 6. Provide REST API that follows guidelines and provides a better developer experience for the automation and integration with PMM/DBaaS.

Reviewer 2: we need to point an exact guideline that we are going to follow.

     "kubernetes_cluster_name": "minikube"
}'

0.30s

## Listing 20 database clusters

time curl -k -s -o file1.out --request POST --url https://localhost:8443/v1/management/DBaaS/DBClusters/List --header 'accept: application/json' --header 'authorization: Basic YWRtaW46YWRtaW4=' --header 'content-type: application/json' --data '{
     "kubernetes_cluster_name": "minikube"
}'
0.67s

time curl -k -s -o file1.out --request POST --url https://localhost:8443/v1/management/DBaaS/DBClusters/List --header 'accept: application/json' --header 'authorization: Basic YWRtaW46YWRtaW4=' --header 'content-type: application/json' --data '{
     "kubernetes_cluster_name": "minikube"
}'
1.14s

time curl -k -s -o file1.out --request POST --url https://localhost:8443/v1/management/DBaaS/DBClusters/List --header 'accept: application/json' --header 'authorization: Basic YWRtaW46YWRtaW4=' --header 'content-type: application/json' --data '{
     "kubernetes_cluster_name": "minikube"
}'
0.76s

```

> The environment for the benchmark above uses the same testing environment

Reviewer 2: Sorry but I have doubts regarding equality of testing environments.
1. The 3rd test uses `"kubernetes_cluster_name": "minikube"` that points me to idea that K8S cluster is running on the same PC with PMM. So network latency and (that is more important) authentication in cloud provider perimeter (I suspect in the prev tests AWS has used) is absent. But exactly this 2 points may bring such big delays.
2. The comments in 3rd test say that there were 10 and 20 DB clusters inside K8S. But how many were in the 1rd and 2nd?

### User Stories

#### Story 1
As an SRE person, I should be able to register the Kubernetes cluster using a service account without admin access to the cluster.

#### Story 2
As an SRE person, I should be able to understand what’s going wrong during the bootstrapping DBaaS feature inside of PMM in case of insufficient permissions so that I can debug and solve my issues. (E.g. No permissions to run kube-state-metrics, pxc, or psmdb operator).

#### Story 3
As an SRE person, I should be able to rename a Kubernetes cluster once it was provisioned automatically so that I can keep my naming conventions.

#### Story 4
As an SRE person, I should be able to specify which database operators I need to install in the cluster.

#### Story 5
As an SRE person, I should be able to create logical spaces to deploy databases so that I can easily split my environments. (e.g. dev namespace goes to the dev environment and the staging namespace goes to the staging environment. For the production environment I should be able to register and setup an additional cluster.)

#### Story 6

> As an SRE person, I should be able to limit access to create/edit/destroy database clusters for specified users so that no devs are bugging me to do it for them.

Reviewer 2: not sure how a proposed architecture meets this story.

Author: It can be implemented with k8s' RBAC integration

#### Story 9
As an SRE person, I should be able to manage database engine versions that are allowed to use because I need to control which versions are used in my environment.

#### Story 10
As an SRE person, I should be able to specify a backup schedule template for a database cluster.

#### Story 11
As an SRE person, I should be able to configure storage for backups.

#### Story 12
As a user, I should be able to deploy a database with the recommended defaults

#### Story 13
As a user, I should be able to deploy a database with the selected version or cluster size

#### Story 14
As a user, I should be able to select a resource template to deploy a database

#### Story 15
As a user, I should be able to select a resource template and database engine configuration template to deploy a database

#### Story 16
As a user, I should be able to edit a database cluster (If I have sufficient permissions)

#### Story 17
As a user, I should be able to delete a database cluster (If I have sufficient permissions)

#### Story 18
As a user, I should be able to create a database cluster from a provided backup file.

#### Story 19

> As a DBA, I should be able to tune performance for a database cluster.

Reviewer 2: it seems it shall be renamed to `edit db configuration parameters`

1. Percona XtraDB Cluster Operator
2. Percona Server MongoDB Operator
3. Victoria Metrics Operator
4. DBaaS operator

Any additional operators should be added to the catalog. Installation of an operator has the following steps:

1. PMM should have DBaaS operator installed
2. PMM creates [Operator Group](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.8/operators/understanding/olm/olm-understanding-operatorgroups.html) if it does not exist
3. PMM creates [subscription](https://olm.operatorframework.io/docs/concepts/olm-architecture/) for the selected operator

**Using OLM with pre-installed operators**

1. PMM gets versions of installed operators
2. PMM creates subscription with specified versions
3. OLM installs [specific version](https://olm.operatorframework.io/docs/tasks/install-operator-with-olm/#example-install-a-specific-version-of-an-operator)
4. Operator restarts and continues to work normally but now OLM manages installation of new versions

> ### PMM REST API high-level design

Reviewer 2: which REST API guidelines does this design follow? 
some endpoints uses `-`, the others `_`, some without separator at all

When DBA would like to have more control over DBs and DB Clusters (versions, sizing, backups, configs, parameters), SRE would like to control over Kubernetes and Cloud infrastructure (networking, storage, secrets) and how that infrastructure connected to applications (affinity, networking, rbac).

Percona Kubernetes operators have CRs that include both parts of those requirements:
- configs, sizing, backup parameters, cluster parameters (sharding, replsets)
- toleration, affinity, annotations, storage classes, networking

All those template requirements are subset of Kubernetes CR objects that are supported by operators and kubernetes addons (such as special annotations).

To define similar properties for different environments, clusters, namespaces - templates could also have different visibility:
- namespace
- environment
- cluster
- set of clusters

And that visibility would probably define where those will be stored:
- template for a namespace (prod/staging namespaces): as object in a namespace
- environment templates: template with environment labels to select from
- cluster wide templates: as object in a cluster for all namespaces

> - global templates: in a external storage in CI/CD, or in PMM as app that manages many clusters

Reviewer 2: I think this option is the best one
